Hello friends
In this video let us have an introduction to selection
Sort selection sort is a simple sorting algorithm and in
this algorithm we will select the correct element for every
position
So assume that there are some students standing in a
queue and all the students in a row should stand
based on their height
That is the shortest person will stand in the beginning
and the tallest one will stand in the end just
like we stand in a school assembly
So let us take these five students with different heights
First one's height is 180 centimetre
The second one's height is 165 centimetre
The third one's height is 150 centimetre and the fourth
one's height is 170 centimetre and the fifth one
height is 145 centimetres
But you can see they are not standing based on
their heights
See here the Tallest person is standing at the first
position and the shortest person is standing at the last
position
They're standing in a randomly
So here we need to select the correct person for
every position
And how can we do that We can do that
by selecting one person at a time and comparing him
with the other person's
And if they are not in the right order we
can change their positions
So first let us select the student who is standing
at Position one and whose height is 180 centimetres
Now let us compare him with the next person and
student
One is taller than student two here which means they
not standing in the right order
So we have to change their positions like this
And you have to understand one thing very clearly
Here we are finding the right person for position one
and we are not finding the right position for student
one
there is difference between them that is we have selected
the position one here and we are comparing the student
at position one with all the other students behind him
And whenever we find a shorter person we bring him
to the first position
So now let us compared the student at position one
with the third person
Because we are finding the right person for position one
So compare these two persons and we can see that
the third person is shorter so again changed their positions
So now compare the student at position one with the
student at position four and we can see that the
fourth student is taller than the first one
So there is no problem
So now compared the student at position one with the
student at Position five and see they are not in
the right order
The fifth one is shorter than the first one so
exchange their positions
And now what just happened
The shortest person that is a person with height
145 centimetres got into his correct position which is position
one
So we selected one position and did many comparisons and
found the right person into that position
So that is what selections sort is so first Position is
now
Okay
Now our objective is to find a correct person for
the position to so compared these two
And we found that the third one is shorter than
the second one
So exchange their positions and now compare the second one
and fourth one
And they are in right order
That is the shorter student is standing before the taller
one so no need to exchange the positions
And now compared to students standing it's 2nd and 5th
positions and see the student and Position five is shorter
than the student at position two
So we have to change their positions
We have to bring the shorter one into the front
And this step is also done now
And now we got the correct person for the position
two now Our objective is to find the correct person
for position
Three So compared these two and we found Third one
is taller than the fourth one
So we have to change their positions and now compared
the students standing a third and fifth positions and see
the student
at position five is shorter than the student at position
two
So we have to change their positions
And now this third step is also completed
And we got the correct person for position three
So now we have the right person at position 1 2
and three
Now we only have to take care of students at
position four and five
So now let us find the correct person for position
four
So compare the students at position four and five
And we found that fourth one is taller than the
fifth one
So we have to change their positions and now this
fourth step is also completed and we got the correct
person for position four
And there is only one student left now and he
must be the tallest one
And he must be at their right position after this
final step
So now all the five students are at their right
positions and this is exactly how selection sort works
In each iteration we will find the minimum or maximum
element and places it in its right position by comparing
it with other elements
So that is what selection sort is Now let us derive
The algorithm for selection sort from this example
So we have five students here
But we needed only four iterations because when fourth person
finds his place the fifth person that is the last
person automatically finds his place too
So if we have size elements size minus one iterations
are enough to sort all the elements so we can
write the outer loop as for i equal to zero i less
than size minus one i plus plus
And in each iteration we are comparing one element with
all other elements which are after it that is in
iteration zero
We are comparing elements that positions 1 2 3 and four
And in iteration one we are comparing elements that positions
2 3 and four and in iteration two we are comparing
elements that positions three and four
And finally in iteration three
We are comparing elements at position four so in every
outer loop iteration
For I the inner loop execution will be from I
plus one to size so we can write the inner
loop
As for J
equal to I plus one j less than size J
plus Plus that is the outer loop is dealing with
an element at a particular position
Then the inner loop make comparisons from the element
one ahead of the element the outer loop is dealing
with till the last elements
And if the order is not correct then the elements
will be swapped
And this is how selections sort works and we have
derived the algorithm for it
In the next video we will learn how this algorithm works with suitable examples.